IAM Solution Architecture
==========================

When approaching an IAM (identity and access management) project within an
organization it is important to consider the work as creating change. In some
circumstances the change will be minimal, with limited impact on resources. In
other cases the change will be significant, impacting both infrastructure and
personnel across the organization. It is recommended that a solution
architecture for IAM projects be developed in order to understand and therefore
plan for change.

Identity management within an enterprise touches virtually all systems in use
within the organization. Systems, in this context, comprise computer systems
that staff use in the performance of their job responsibilities and physical
systems such as a requirement to show an identity pass to gain access to a
restricted area.

It is the task of an identity professional to ensure that, wherever and whenever
identity information is used within an enterprise, the information is collected
and used in a properly designed environment that ensures efficiency, protects
privacy and safeguards integrity. Applying an architectural approach will
significantly raise the likelihood that an IAM project will be completed
consistently and comprehensively with controlled impact on stakeholders.

There are four levels that should be addressed by a solution architecture:


![Enterprise Architecture Framework](Figure1.png)
Figure 1 - Enterprise Architecture Framework[^1]


Note: the IDPro Body of Knowledge does not endorse a particular architecture
framework. Identity professionals will be faced with many different approaches,
and an identity professional will need to adopt the model that best suits the
organization.

For organizations with and enterprise architecture this should be quite easy.
For other organizations the environment will be “greenfield” allowing the
identity professional to develop their own architectural approach.

[^1] Adapted from the Metagroup framework, 2002.
