---
title: 'Editor''s Note'
---

Heather Flanagan, Principal Editor, IDPro

It takes a village--or, in our case, a global industry of IAM
Practitioners--to create a new Body of Knowledge (BoK). This first
collection of articles is brought to you by individuals from around the
globe, including Europe, Australasia, and the Americas. Without their
engagement, we would not have been able to bootstrap this collection.

This first issue of the IDPro Body of Knowledge offers an orientation
for the identity practitioner to some of the subject matter frequently
encountered in organizations.  We start this collection with an
Introduction to Identity -- Part 1: Admin-time, brought to us by Ian
Glazer and edited by Espen Bago. From there, we look at the world of
Identifiers and Usernames, another excellent article by Ian Glazer.
Three articles focus on how legal systems impact IAM: Laws Governing
Identity Systems by Thomas Smedinghoff, Introduction to the GDPR by
Andrew Cormack, and Impact of GDPR on Identity and Access Management by
Andrew Hindle.

Standards have a big impact on the IAM space, and Corey Scholefield
offers a review of ISO/IEC 24760:2019 -- Part 1. Project management
styles also have a big impact on IAM, and we have an Introduction to
Project Management for IAM Projects from Graham Williamson and Corey
Scholefield.

We wrap up this issue with a short list of Independent IAM
Organizations, organized by Mark Drummond, which introduces the reader
to some of the organizations that coordinate and support various aspects
of IAM around the world.

Readers are encouraged to offer feedback via our GitHub repository
([[https://github.com/IDPros]{.underline}](https://github.com/IDPros)).
All articles will have a copy published in the 'bok' repository so
people can offer feedback, corrections, or requests for more
information.

This is only the first issue; future releases of the BoK will extend
beyond these concepts to provide other interesting perspectives and
introduce new topics, such as the identities of things, IAM in the
Workforce as opposed to IAM from the consumer perspective, and new
standards including Verifiable Credentials and Decentralized Identity. 
The IDPro BoK will remain a collaborative effort and we welcome your
suggestions on what should change in the introduction as well as the
other articles. We particularly encourage engagement---authoring,
reviewing, participating on the BoK Committee---from a more diverse set
of individuals. There are so many people across all races, genders, and
cultures out there with the varied experience and ideas that we need to
see in the BoK; please participate!

Thank you for your support as we create the Body of Knowledge that our
industry so desperately needs! I hope you will continue to engage with
IDPro and consider writing an article yourself for a future issue!
