---
title: 'Review - ISO/IEC 24760-1:2019'
---

"IT Security and Privacy - A framework for identity management - Part 1:
Terminology and concepts," *International Organization for Standards*,
Technical Committee ISO/IEC JTC 1, Subcommittee SC 27, May 2019,
<https://www.iso.org/standard/77582.html>.

Reviewer: Corey Scholefield

Abstract
========

This review offers insight into the first part of the ISO standard for
Identity Management, ISO/IEC 24760-1:2019, which covers terminology and
concepts.

Review
======

ISO/IEC 24760-1:2019 provides an introduction to the vocabulary of the
identity management space, with definitions of key terms in common usage
within the community. Under review is the 2^nd^ edition of the document,
revised for 2019-May.

As stated in the introduction to the document:

> The goal of this document is to specify the terminology and concepts
> for identity management, in order to promote a common understanding in
> the field of identity management.

According to its abstract:

> It is applicable to any information system that processes identity
> information.

The document supports the goal by offering brief definitions of
community-standard terms, such as:

-   *identity*

-   *attribute*

-   *identifier*

-   *principal*

-   *identity-proofing*

While the tone of the document is slightly academic, the definitions
themselves:

-   are written using terms familiar to English-speakers;

-   include other terms that appear in the document, with convenient
    links to access their definitions easily;

-   include some examples to illustrate the usage of the term, or to
    illustrate the concept.

This document only includes terminology, concepts, and brief definitions
and outlines. It is intended to be used as reference material.

The authors have taken some effort to ensure that these definitions can
be applied to a broad set of use cases, i.e., definitions of identity
for use within human and non-human (device) contexts. This treatment
keeps some of the coverage at a high-level, causing the supporting
examples to be quite helpful for providing a real-world abstraction of
some concepts. That being said, this reader would have appreciated a few
more examples to help support some of the definitions.

The article only contains one figure, which is supportive of the concept
it depicts. The document could be improved by using more illustrations
to outline concepts.

The bibliography section is excellent and provides links to many other
foundational documents in the contemporary identity-management space.
Many of those references are freely available for download. This
document intends to provide authoritative definitions of terms and
concepts, so other documents probably use this one as a reference
document.

A reader who needs a basic introduction to the common terms included in
this document will find this material very helpful, as the terminology
is very relevant in contemporary identity-management conversations.

The more-seasoned reader will also find a useful reference document but
may also wonder about the omission of terms such as *persona*,
*account*, or *authorization.* It could be that these terms (and
others?) might not fall within a strict scope of *identity-management*
that the authors wished to cover in this document. Instead, those terms
may fall under the category of *access management*, a closely connected
but separate body of information security knowledge.

The document does not support any treatment of identity in a
social-science concept, so the definitions should be taken as they apply
to identity-management in technical use cases.
