---
title: 'Review - ISO/IEC 24760-2:2015'
subtitle: 'IT Security and Privacy - A framework for identity management - Part 2: Reference architecture and requirements'
---


"IT Security and Privacy - A framework for identity management - Part 2:
Reference architecture and requirements," *International Organization
for Standards* , Technical Committee ISO/IEC JTC 1, Subcommittee SC 27,
June 2015,
[https://www.iso.org/standard/57915.html](https://www.iso.org/standard/57915.html)
.

Reviewer: George Dobbs

Â© 2020 George Dobbs, IDPro

Review
======

This document is formal in nature and provides a rigorous model of an
identity management system and a notion of what should be include in the
design for that system. Those without architectural background may find
the approach to be too academic, but if you are looking to add a degree
of rigor to your plans, read on.

After the preliminaries the text jumps into a set of viewpoints that
provide a minimally acceptable documented design; these are a context
view and a functional view. The document then describes these views in
terms of definitions, concerns, and models.

Moving on from viewpoints, the text takes up the two mandatory views in
some detail. For the context view the text elaborates on stakeholders,
actors, context model, use case model, and compliance and governance
model. The elaboration regarding stakeholders may be useful as it
identifies some of the stakeholders that are often forgotten, such as
regulatory bodies, and the rarely mentioned consumer/citizen
representative or advocate.

The text not only lists the set of stakeholders to consider; it also
identifies their concerns.

The text distinguishes between stakeholders and actors although there is
significant overlap in the lists. Where stakeholders have concerns, the
actors have responsibilities and, in some cases, provide capabilities,
both of which are listed. The diligent reader may want to study the text
of the actor section carefully as it is quite precise and conveys a lot
of concepts in a small space.

The text moves on to the use cases. The text provides a simple use-case
as an example, then describes several more specific classes of use-case
(employee, employer, principal, and device). Interestingly enough, the
text does not call out specific use case for Customer/Citizen, although
it does for Employee. Instead these concepts are included in the
Principal use cases section. Additional examples are given in Annex B.
These examples should be useful. For a practitioner fluent in universal
modeling language (UML) the diagrams and use-case section should be
straightforward. For others, this may be harder hill to climb.

The context view is rounded out with a short section on what should be
included in a compliance and governance model. This section provides a
checklist.

Next up is the functional view. This section lists interactions expected
between the actors and architectural elements in the system. It covers
ten processes including maintenance of identity information, access to
identity information, winding up with less common processes such as
identity authority discovery and publication of identity information
(under a policy). Again, these are tersely worded but should provide
useful checklists to the practitioner. The functional components are
laid out as a UML diagram in Annex C, which brings in a couple of new
items such as "Trust Root".

Before moving on to the requirements section, the text outlines 4
scenarios. The scenarios are used to determine the trust relationships
that are needed. This brief section encourages the architect to design
for confidentiality, integrity and trust needed by each scenario. There
is very little detail provided. For instance, the federation scenario is
described in abstract terms but there is no mention of the common
notions of identity provider or relying party. But it does encourage the
architect to at least consider what scenarios are desired, helping to
establish requirements.

The main text wraps up with a listing of requirements, both functional
and non-functional. This is an excellent source to use in establishing
the requirements for a system.

In addition to Annexes A - C, the document provides Annex D, which
elaborates on selected business processes including consent management,
credential lifecycle management, configuration management (in a
federation), policy management, and principal's life cycle management.

Overall the document is very formal and structured, which enables
consumption of the core foundation concepts of Identity Management.
Access management is referenced only in a reflexive mode -- to control
the access to identity information itself. The more general access
management may be covered in another ISO/IEC document: ISO/IEC 29146,
*Information technology --- Security techniques --- A framework for
access management.* This may lead the reader to a point of frustration
if looking for details about authorization and authentication.

The reviewer finds this document to be valuable for the identity
practitioner who is confronted with developing a new identity system or
evaluating the current state of an identity system in order to mitigate
gaps and shortcomings. It provides a structured framework of concepts
that can be used to inform such work. That being said, it is a text that
requires the reader to bring significant powers of mind and experience
to the reading. The presentation does not cover access management; it
focuses entirely on identity management. It refers to another ISO/IEC
document for access management. There are a few other off-document
references, but this reviewer feels those can be skipped without
affecting the understanding too much. This document is appropriate for
those seeking to build or revise a robust identity system and are
seeking to compare their own thoughts to the work of others in order to
gain assurance that a complete design has been produced.
