---
title: 'Review -- ISO/IEC 24760-3:2016'
subtitle: 'Information technology --- Security techniques --- A framework for identity management --- Part 3: Practice'
---


"IT Security and Privacy -
A framework for identity management - Part 3: Practice," *International
Organization for Standards* , Technical Committee ISO/IEC JTC 1,
Subcommittee SC 27, August 2016,
[https://www.iso.org/standard/57915.html](https://www.iso.org/standard/57915.html).

Reviewer: Espen Bago

Â© 2020 Espen Bago, IDPro


Review
======

An important note here is that this review is written looking
exclusively at Part 3 without having detailed knowledge of the prior
parts. Based on the references within Part 3 to the other parts, this
document is not intended to be used in isolation, but since each part is
licensed and sold separately, reviewing it in isolation from the other
parts may give an indication of its individual worth.

ISO/IEC 24760-3 states its own purpose as to *specify relevant concepts,
operational structures and practices that may enable the required
assurance and control for use of both identity information and identity
management systems* . The implication is that this document provides
good practices for identity management, with the main target audience
being those who are starting an identity initiative or need to better
control an ongoing initiative of this sort.

This intention of providing practices for achieving central and typical
goals within identity is laudable, and it is something often searched
for by practitioners. But this document fails to deliver on the promises
due to several factors, the most important ones being inconsistency of
structure and inconsistency of content in each section.

The core of the ISO/IEC 24760-3 are the 12 pages about risk mitigation
for identity, identifiers and identity information, auditing and about
control objectives and controls, with this last section on controls and
objectives taking up the main part. These sections list advice
(practices) for different parts of the work necessary when setting up
and maintaining identity management systems, and when extracting that
information, there is plenty of useful information that could read as a
checklist of advice and suggestions.

The challenge is that getting to that useful information and extracting
it, is hard due to the convoluted setup in subsections that are
difficult to follow, especially since the subsections do not
consistently contain the same level or detail of information. Thus it is
unnecessarily challenging to understand the given practices either as a
whole or to find the relevant, sought after practice for a given
situation. Additionally, when found, such information tends to be very
simplistic or high level. As an example, the section auditing an
identity management system mainly states that audits should be done, and
that their purpose should be to validate that the system functions in
accordance to its requirements and policies.

A future revision of this standard would benefit from simplifying its
section structure, with emphasis on making it clearer what it is trying
to express. Possibly, since most of the information is very high level
in nature, a format closer to a checklist might also be beneficial.

As it stands now, this standard is most accessible to the most
experienced practitioners, since they are better equipped to navigate
the document. But these practitioners are also those least in need of
the information, since they normally already know most of the practices
from experience. Most practitioners new to the area would struggle
putting the current (2016-08) version ISO/IEC 24760-3 to use for the
stated purpose.

There are no figures in the main body of the document, which seems
reasonable as the practices described do not lend themselves to be
easily visualized.

Apart from the aforementioned core of the document, half of the ISO/IEC
24760-3 are taken up by two annexes. The reason these are not so far
reviewed as being core, is that nothing in the text refers to them, and
they are not directly related to anything in the preceding text. Put
simply, these annexes of 16 pages out of the total 38 appear out of
place, giving the impression that they were included to reach a certain
page length.

That being said, the two articles in the annexes are well written and
cover interesting areas. Had they been directly relevant to the stated
purpose of the standard, the annexes would be enough to warrant a
recommendation of the whole document.

For reference, the annexes, including descriptive figures and diagrams,
cover practices for federating identity (or potentially rather access)
management systems - annex A - and a breakdown of what attribute-based
credentials are and how they can be used for authentication. Anyone
needing either specific information on setting up federated systems, or
working with attribute-based credentials, would probably find this
document worth perusing.
