---
generator: pandoc
title: 'Introduction to Identity - Part 2: Access Management'
---


By Pamela Dingle

Â© 2020 IDPro, Pamela Dingle

Terminology
-----------

-   Ceremonies - predictable interactions that users can infrequently
    navigate in a well-watched place

-   Delegated authorization framework - an access control framework that
    decouples authentication from authorization, allowing the password
    to stay local and protected. [^1]

-   Federated Identity - the means of linking a person's electronic
    identity and attributes, stored across multiple distinct identity
    management systems. [^2]

-   Least privilege - also known as the Principle of Least Privilege; a
    resource, such as a user, must only be able to access the resources
    (e.g., applications, data) that are necessary for it to function.
    [^3]

-   Trust federation - a trust framework between multiple entities with
    the purpose of leveraging identity and access management information
    in a controlled fashion.

-   Zero trust - From NIST Draft Special Publication 800-207, "Zero
    trust assumes there is no implicit trust granted to assets or user
    accounts based solely on their physical or network location (i.e.,
    local area networks versus the internet)" [^4]

Introduction
============

What is access management, and why is it so exciting? There is something
thrilling and urgent about the moment a decision is made, a gate is
lifted, and a precious resource is made available to a stranger. Did we
make the right person productive, or did we make a risky mistake? Good
access management depends on good identity data; it also requires
policies that represent corporate rules, an accurate understanding of
current environmental and contextual factors, and tools that can enforce
according to a defined risk tolerance. A lot of preparation and
consideration goes into the run-time decisions that are made every day
and that operate with all kinds of granularity at infrastructure,
middleware, and application layers.

If you are an experienced identity professional, you have watched our
tools evolve - but if you are just starting, it can be valuable to hear
some perspective on why things are the way they are. Hold on to your
hats: this introduction is not even remotely objective, but it will give
you one perspective on how we got here and how the concepts discussed in
later chapters have evolved into our current access management
landscape.

To kick off the ride, here are a few critical realities to keep in mind
in the world of access management:

Resources need stability
------------------------

Company secrets, financial transactions, and personal communications are
just a few examples of the precious resources that identity
professionals are tasked with protecting. Resources may be exposed
through application programming interfaces (APIs), web interfaces, or
native mobile applications. Adding externalized access management
capabilities to a single resource is relatively easy, but adding to a
hundred or a thousand is exhausting. Owners of these applications rarely
want to make frequent changes. After the first time, you as an identity
professional try to schedule an application access management update
within the change management windows of a hundred different
applications, you will feel the same way.

Resources should not perform local identity management
------------------------------------------------------

If every resource you deploy performs its own login functions, it is
nearly impossible to ensure that they follow the kinds of best practices
detailed in places such as NIST 800-63B or adhere to unified corporate
policies. [^5] Hundreds of applications
each separately attempting to store credentials, protect a login page,
and secure an account recovery process present an immense attack surface
and make it likely that users will reuse passwords across applications.
This pattern means an attacker who guesses the password to one
application has a credential that can be replayed to gain access to
other applications, and you have no way to know which applications are
at risk.

Humans need challenges, but not obstacles
-----------------------------------------

While resources need stability and consistency, humans need empathy. We
require users to interact with computer systems to show they are the
proper operator of the digital account they claim to have a right to;
this process should be easy for a good user and tough for an impostor.
The best practice is to create "ceremonies" - predictable interactions
that users can infrequently navigate in a well-watched place. While
authentication is the best-known ceremony, there are many other ways in
which humans are asked to interact, such as self-service registration or
account recovery, notifications, or transactional approval. We want
users to notice when an unusual ceremony takes place because it may
alert them that fraud is happening. Ceremonies are guaranteed to change
as new attacks force administrators to try additional techniques,
including changes in user experience (UX), authentication factors, and
risk detection. While it is important to keep the attackers out, the
experience of the good users is critically important. Faced with a tough
problem, humans often behave predictably, and that predictability is an
attack vector in itself. If you as the administrator make your users'
lives too hard, you become the problem: Users will circumvent the
controls you put in place to try to protect them.

Garbage In, Garbage Out
-----------------------

The most visible parts of access management are decisions made in the
moment, but those decisions do not exist in a vacuum. Before any access
management decision is made, someone has to set up digital rules and
policies that closely approximate the business goals of the organization
(see "Introduction to Project Management for IAM Projects" for more on
managing an IAM project). [^6] User, group,
and role context must exist, and some combination of device, network,
and risk context as well. By the time a user attempts to access a given
resource, all of the data that might go into an access choice should be
available. Never forget: It doesn't matter how good your access
management infrastructure is if decisions are based on bad input.

Now, on to the Fun Part
-----------------------

Identity professionals end up at the forefront of an age-old problem. We
have resources to protect, users who want access, and attackers who want
access as well and are really hard to distinguish from users. We need a
system that is accurate, but no system will be 100% accurate, so the
system must also follow the principles of zero trust, starting with
least privilege. We must strongly authenticate users and leverage the
environmental context to detect fraud. We must apply a single consistent
policy view across a disparate landscape of resources. And we have to
verify all the time that our systems are working the way we think they
are.

Access Management as an Evolution
=================================

This body of knowledge will give you all sorts of data about the basic
concepts that are deployed in an access management regime - but why do
those mechanisms exist? They evolved in response to both business
requirements and security threats. Administrators found themselves
lacking in control and created best practices that made administration
at scale easier and attacks at scale more difficult.

Password Proliferation Gave Us Directories
------------------------------------------

When businesses first began accumulating business programs within their
private network, every new program required that user accounts be
created and deleted. Every program asked each user to set a password. As
businesses grew to have hundreds and thousands of programs, users hit
the limit of how many usernames and passwords they could remember. Some
programs let users choose their own usernames, and as a result,
usernames varied wildly across programs. Many programs had wildly
varying password policies. It was the wild west and from that wild west
came the concept of "directories". Instead of a hundred programs
separately storing usernames and passwords, applications began to call
out to an external directory of users, often using LDAP (Lightweight
Directory Access Protocol). [^7] ,
[^8] Suddenly, users could use one password
everywhere, and administrators didn't have to maintain thousands of
applications individually. All was well\... for a while.

Password Fatigue Gave Us Web Access Management
----------------------------------------------

The upside to user directories and LDAP was that users only had to
remember one password. The downside was that even if all applications at
the time were within the same network perimeter and were all
LDAP-integrated, the user was still prompted for their password every
time they used a new application - over the course of a day, that was a
lot of typing. The resulting innovation was a new access management
technique called "Web Access Management" (WAM). [^9] With web access management, users would authenticate once
with their password, and then a (usually encrypted) domain-wide session
cookie would be generated that could be read by multiple applications.
Instead of performing an LDAP "bind," the application could check that
the user had a valid cookie. Around the same time, other technologies to
address password fatigue developed, including Kerberos.
[^10] These technologies finally give
users some relief; a user could log in one time and access multiple
applications. The concept of logging in once to access multiple apps has
come to be known as 'single sign-on' (SSO).

Perimeter Limitations Gave Us Federation
----------------------------------------

As long as businesses were operating within their network perimeters,
access management functions like Kerberos and WAM provided both
convenience and security. But the Internet was opening up, and many
companies wanted to begin allowing not only their employees to access
resources, but also partners and customers. Businesses wanted to create
trust relationships with other businesses and enable their users to
access each other's applications. This desire was met through a standard
called SAML (Security Assertion Markup Language). [^11] Businesses pre-establish a trust "federation" between two
domains and then request a secure introduction whenever a user attempts
to access a resource. SAML and other federated identity specifications
allowed businesses to retain control over the activities of their own
users both in their own domains and across domains. Federated identity
remains a backbone of access management, and SAML is still the gold
standard for cross-domain access management.

Mobile & API Innovation Gave Us OAuth & Delegated Authorization Frameworks
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federation and SSO are what we call in the industry "user-present"
scenarios. We can tell that the user is present in a federation request
because the activity occurs using a browser, and browsers don't have
brains - they are 'passive' clients, and somebody has to be there to
push the buttons and click the links. Around 2007, most business
application delivery was focused on the browser - but the release of the
first "smartphone" changed the game. Mobile applications could be
downloaded from an app store and render data accessed from cloud APIs,
just as cloud platforms were becoming popular. Suddenly an 'active'
software client became a desirable way to talk to users.

Even as users got excited about the power of mobile applications,
identity professionals ran into a problem: applications were calling
APIs when users were not present, and even worse, many mobile
applications wanted to consume and display data from cloud platforms
that they were not affiliated to. If a mobile app wanted to access an
unaffiliated cloud platform, the only answer was to ask the user for
their password and then replay the password within every single API
fetch. The result was something called the **password anti-pattern** :
users got used to giving away their cloud platform passwords to any
client that asked for it, and those clients had to cache user
credentials on mobile devices so they could execute API calls in users'
absence.

SAML was not a perfect fit in a mobile context. XML parsers were not
built into mobile platforms, and cryptographic requirements were heavy.
The resulting access management paradigm was OAuth 1.0, a "delegated
authorization framework" that could layer with federated protocols.
OAuth addresses the 'user not present' scenario: applications ask for
and receive an "access token" that does not introduce the user; instead,
access tokens represent the ability to access a tightly scoped set data
and services on behalf of a user.

Maybe access tokens don't sound like such a big deal, but when you
consider that you can pass access tokens to APIs instead of primary
credentials, the results are significant. You prevent API endpoints from
ever collecting or validating primary user credentials, thus removing
multiple attack vectors around data leakage, man-in-the-middle-attacks,
and rogue administrators harvesting credentials. Because the mechanism
for authorizing the API is decoupled from the mechanism for
authenticating users, the door opens to a world where a user could
authenticate with factors other than a password without causing work for
applications. Access tokens act as a stable currency that can be
centrally architected and scalably deployed.

Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA) Is and Was and Will be Again
--------------------------------------------------------------

Through all of the above antics and shenanigans, password attacks were
haunting identity administrators. All sorts of conventions evolved to
try to keep attackers out of accounts they didn't own: we forced people
to change their passwords regularly; we forced them to set longer and
more complex passwords; we designed our LDAP directories and login forms
to stop responding if too many incorrect attempts were made. Despite all
these attempts to mitigate the risk, almost any password a human could
set and remember without help is trivially attackable. If you doubt this
statement, read " [*Your Pa\$\$word doesn't
matter*](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/azure-active-directory-identity/your-pa-word-doesn-t-matter/ba-p/731984)
" by Alex Weinert (\@alex\_t\_weinert). [^12] Be prepared to weep.

The revelation that passwords are fundamentally flawed is not new -
dating back to at least the '70s, there has been research on how to get
around the need for a human brain in the authentication process.
[^13], [^14] We developed the simple idea that passwords are "something
you know," but also described other options for validating a human's
ownership of a digital account could also include "something you have"
or "something you are". The idea is not that validating the thing you
have can replace the thing you know, but rather that a combination of
things you have, are, and know would require an attacker to compromise
both digital and physical information. Today, the state of the art in
multi-factor authentication is very sophisticated. A growing number of
users protect their phone with a biometric, navigate an SMS message to
confirm a transaction, or use an OTP (one-time password) to improve
security without any need to understand the underlying principles.

We all know that MFA must continue to improve in usability to become
ubiquitous. Specifications like FIDO2 are industry-changing for access
management, not because the problem is solved - but because the problem
is ***decoupled*** - FIDO2 (W3C WebAuthn and FIDO CTAP2) has separated
the problem of negotiating cryptographic keys from the problem of
requiring user gestures. [^15] The
cryptographic key exchange can now stay reliable, while we focus on
innovation - and possibly even revolution - in user interactions.

The Best Security is Invisible Security
---------------------------------------

In addition to the visible ceremonies we put in front of those who
attempt access to resources, a lot is happening beneath the surface. We
increasingly rely on context to supplement active user challenges in
calculating the risk of any given transaction. Adjacent areas to
identity are now critical stakeholders in our attempts to prevent
identity fraud - Cloud Access Security Brokers (CASBs),
[^16] Unified Endpoint Management (for
example, Mobile Device Management or MDM), [^17] and EUBA (Entity and User Behavioral Analysis)
[^18] fortify our access management
regimes. Attackers have learned to defeat static access management
processes, so we have evolved our defenses beyond password complexity:
if you are not checking passwords against a rapidly updated set of
banned strings including lists of newly known-to-be-breached passwords
and augmenting this with real-time threat intelligence you are in
serious trouble.

And the Moral of the story is\...
=================================

That brings us to now. Identity professionals today still struggle with
all of the anecdotal issues listed here, but we have tools at our
disposal and conventions on how to best deploy them. The better we can
get as a profession at working together to eliminate fraud, detect
abuse, and guide our users towards successful interactions, the better
off everyone is. Everyone before you leveraged the work of their
contemporaries to take a step forward. Now you have the opportunity to
take the next step.

What Will Access Management look like in the Future?
----------------------------------------------------

When we look back on today's world of access management, what stories
will be our contribution? There will be an assessment of our success in
helping users to adopt multiple factors - did we succeed? Did we miss
opportunities? As long as we are timid, a huge chunk of our immediate
future will be spent mitigating attacks that we already *know* are
mostly preventable. Dragging your feet on MFA as an access management
professional today is like catching up on social media when you know you
have a report due (a behavior common enough to have its own name:
akrasia).[^19] After the fact, we will
ask ourselves why we got in our own way, and there will likely be no
good answer.

At some point, when enough administrators adopt MFA and eliminate the
easy jackpots that are single-factor passwords, our industry will win
this amazing prize:

**A whole new wave of inventive attacks!**

That may not sound so great, but it really is. Today, attackers can
spend almost no money or time and still make a living from doing nothing
fancier than running free phishing scripts from the Internet. A strongly
authenticated world does not eliminate jackpots, but it does make the
pool of criminals able to win those prizes a much more distinguished
group. Attackers will move to post-authentication attacks like token
theft and consent abuse. And the whole time, identity professionals and
others will be making new things! Inventing better ways! Introducing
resources and content that businesses want! We will embrace wearables as
security devices, perform secure transactions even in hostile places,
make the measure of least privilege even tighter. We will get better at
tracking the promises that products make to us and better at punishing
those who mess with our data. We will find a way to share private things
and have true confidence that those private things will never become
public. We will weather quantum meltdowns and new social networks, and
it will all be a fight worth fighting.

The identity management professional who has read this far is clearly
dedicated - and that is a great thing. We need the next generation of
professionals to pick up the torch, question all assumptions, and push
us into a future where risk is low, productivity is high, and new
challenges keep our lives interesting.

Author Bio
----------

![Photo of author](image1.jpeg){width="123" height="158"} Pamela
Dingle is a long-time member of the identity management world, and is a
Director, running the identity standards team at Microsoft. The identity
standards team works with standards bodies like W3C, IETF, and the
OpenID Foundation on specifications like OAuth 2.0, FIDO, SCIM, and
OpenID Connect, and Pamela works to ensure that customers, product
groups, and the industry all understand the value of standards and other
identity best practice patterns. Pamela spent eight years as an identity
architect and eight years in the office of the CTO at Ping Identity and
is a founder of Women in Identity.


------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Raible, Matt, "What the Heck is OAuth?" DZone Security Zone, 28
    April 2018, <https://dzone.com/articles/what-the-heck-is-oauth> .
   

2.  Wikipedia contributors, \"Federated identity,\" Wikipedia, The Free
    Encyclopedia,
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Federated_identity&oldid=949399706>
    (accessed June 6, 2020). 

3.  Wikipedia contributors, \"Principle of least privilege,\" Wikipedia,
    The Free Encyclopedia,
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Principle_of_least_privilege&oldid=950981064>
    (accessed June 6, 2020).

4.  Rose, Scott, and Oliver Borchert, Stu Mitchell, Sean Connelly, "Zero
    Trust Architecture (2 ^nd^ Draft)," SP 800-207 (Draft), National
    Institute of Standards and Technology, February 2020,
    <https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-207/draft> .
   

5.  Paul A. Grassi, James L. Fenton, Elaine M. Newton, Ray A. Perlner,
    Andrew R. Regenscheid, William E. Burr, and Justin P. Richer. 2017.
    Digital identity guidelines - Authentication and Lifecycle
    Management. Technical Report. NIST Special Publication 800-63B.
    

6.  Graham Williamson and Corey Scholefield. Introduction to IAM Project
    Management for IAM Projects. IDPro Body of Knowledge, volume 1,
    issue 1, 31 March 2020. <https://bok.idpro.org/article/id/25/> .
    

7.  Wikipedia contributors, \"Lightweight Directory Access Protocol,\"
    Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lightweight_Directory_Access_Protocol&oldid=960496535>
    (accessed June 6, 2020).

8.  "The Most Complete History of Directory Services You Will
    EverÂ Find," blog, Easy Identity, 13 April 2020,
    <https://idmdude.com/2012/04/13/the-most-complete-history-of-directory-services-you-will-ever-find/>
    (accessed June 12, 2020).

9.  Wikipedia contributors, \"Web access management,\" Wikipedia, The
    Free Encyclopedia,
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Web_access_management&oldid=959341667>
    (accessed June 6, 2020). 

10. :Wikipedia contributors, \"Kerberos (protocol),\" Wikipedia, The Free
    Encyclopedia,
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kerberos_(protocol)&oldid=960957884>
    (accessed June 6, 2020).

11. Wikipedia contributors, \"Security Assertion Markup Language,\"
    Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Security_Assertion_Markup_Language&oldid=956779073>
    (accessed June 6, 2020).


12. Weinert, Alex, "Your Pa\$\$word doesn't matter," Azure Active
    Directory Identity Blog, Microsoft Corporation, 9 July 2019,
    <https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/azure-active-directory-identity/your-pa-word-doesn-t-matter/ba-p/731984>.

13. Morris, Robert, and Ken Thompson. \"Password security: A case
    history.\" Communications of the ACM 22.11 (1979): 594-597.


14. Feldmeier D.C., Karn P.R. (1990) UNIX Password Security - Ten Years
    Later. In: Brassard G. (eds) Advances in Cryptology --- CRYPTO' 89
    Proceedings. CRYPTO 1989. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
    vol 435. Springer, New York, NY.

15. "FIDO2:WebAuthn & CTAP," FIDO Alliance,
    <https://fidoalliance.org/fido2/> .

16. :Wikipedia contributors, \"Cloud access security broker,\" Wikipedia,
    The Free Encyclopedia,
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cloud_access_security_broker&oldid=949494699>
    (accessed June 6, 2020).

17. Raam, Giridhara, "The What, Why, and How of Unified Endpoint
    Management," Integration Zone, DZone, 8 July 2019,
    <https://dzone.com/articles/the-what-why-and-how-of-unified-endpoint-managemen>.

18. Petters, Jeff, "What is UEBA? Complete Guide to User and Entity
    Behavior Analytics," Inside Out Security Blog, Varonis, 29
    March 2020.
    <https://www.varonis.com/blog/user-entity-behavior-analytics-ueba/>.


19. Clear, James, "The Akrasia Effect: Why We Don't Follow Through on
    What We Set Out to Do and What to Do About It," excerpt from [Atomic
    Habits](https://jamesclear.com/atomic-habits) ,
    <https://jamesclear.com/akrasia> (accessed June 6, 2020).
 
