# Optimizing Access Recertifications: Enhancing Security, Compliance, and Efficiency in Identity Governance

© 2025 IDPro, Vatsal Gupta

*To comment on this article, please visit our [<span
class="underline">GitHub
repository</span>](https://github.com/IDPros/bok) and [<span
class="underline">submit an
issue</span>](https://docs.github.com/en/github/managing-your-work-on-github/opening-an-issue-from-code).*

Abstract
========

Identity Governance and Administration (IGA) relies on access
certification to confirm that users possess only essential permissions
for their assigned roles. The process supports the principle of least
privilege while reducing security threats and ensuring compliance with
standards like SOX, HIPAA, PCI-DSS, ISO/IEC 27001, and GDPR. Various
access certification models, including manager-driven, privilege
owner-driven, system owner-driven, and event-driven reviews, help
organizations maintain security policies and meet compliance
requirements. Challenges such as review fatigue, scalability issues, and
inconsistent policies can hinder access certification effectiveness.
Organizations should address these challenges through automation tools
combined with risk-based prioritization, using AI-driven recommendations
and ensuring integration across IT and HR systems. Optimizing
certification processes enables enterprises to strengthen security
measures while boosting audit preparedness and simplifying compliance
management.

Introduction
============

Workforce identity goes through multiple stages in its lifecycle,
including creation, account and access provisioning, access management,
and
de-provisioning<a href="#fn1" id="fnref1" class="footnote-ref"><sup>1</sup></a>.
The most important of these is the access management phase. Most of the
time, it gives assurance that the correct system users continue to hold
appropriate access to systems for bona fide purposes. Access usually
evolves over time due to changing business conditions, role changes, or
changes in the structure of the organization. Organizations need to
implement access certification to safeguard the principle of least
privilege after such events.

Access certification, otherwise called access reviews, is one of the
most significant and challenging processes in the IGA domain. It is the
process of periodically reviewing the user’s rights over systems,
applications, and data to validate them against the defined security
policies, risks, and compliance with industry standards.

Terminology
-----------

**Principle of Least Privilege (PoLP):** The Principle of Least
Privilege (PoLP) states that users, applications, and systems should be
granted only the minimum level of access, permissions, or privileges
necessary to perform their required tasks, nothing more. For example,
a software developer may need access to a development database but
shouldn't have admin rights to production systems.

**Access** **Certification**: Access Certifications, also known
as access recertifications or access reviews, are the periodic process
of reviewing and validating user access rights to ensure they align with
business needs, security policies, and compliance requirements.

**Access Recertification:** A specific type of access certification that
occurs at regular intervals to revalidate user access. It ensures that
users still need their assigned entitlements and helps remove
unnecessary or excessive access.

**Privilege:** Privilege in IAM refers to the rights or permissions
granted to users, systems, or applications to perform specific actions.
It can be standard, elevated, or administrative, depending on the level
of control.

**Entitlement**: An entitlement is a specific set of permissions or
privileges that define what a user, system, or application can access
within an IT environment. It governs actions like read, write, execute,
or administer resources in accordance with security policies.

**Entitlement Owner:** An Entitlement Owner manages and oversees
specific access rights within an IAM system. They approve, review, and
govern entitlements to ensure security, compliance, and least privilege
access. Their role helps prevent excessive permissions and enforce
access control policies.

**Role-Based Access Control (RBAC):** RBAC is a security model that
assigns permissions to users based on their roles within an
organization. Instead of granting access to individuals directly, RBAC
groups users into roles, each with predefined permissions, ensuring
consistent and scalable access management.

**Identity Governance and Administration (IGA):** Identity Governance
and Administration (IGA) is a framework that manages and governs user
identities, access rights, and security policies across an organization.
It ensures that the right individuals have the right access to the right
resources at the right time while maintaining security and compliance.

Importance of Access Certification
==================================

Access certification is necessary to ensure that users have only the
access they need, minimizing security risks and maintaining compliance
with industry regulations. Here are the key reasons why it is essential:

**Enforcing the Principle of Least Privilege**: Over time, users may
accumulate unnecessary access due to role changes, retaining access to
files or services they are not working on anymore, or simply by
requesting and keeping access that they did not need in the first place.
Certification ensures that users retain only the minimum necessary
access.

**Mitigating Security Risks**: Unchecked access can lead to insider
threats, privilege escalation, or unauthorized data exposure. Regular
access reviews help prevent security breaches by identifying and
revoking excessive or outdated privileges.

**Compliance With Regulations**: Numerous industries require adherence
to regulations, making it necessary for organizations to review and
certify user access routinely. These regulations are complied with
through access certification.

SOX (Sarbanes-Oxley Act): An internal control system on financial
reporting that includes user access
control<a href="#fn2" id="fnref2" class="footnote-ref"><sup>2</sup></a>.

HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act): Requires
access to protect patient data from unauthorized
use<a href="#fn3" id="fnref3" class="footnote-ref"><sup>3</sup></a>.

PCI-DSS (Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard): Users with
payment data systems must undergo routinely scheduled access control
reviews to mitigate fraud and unauthorized payment
transactions<a href="#fn4" id="fnref4" class="footnote-ref"><sup>4</sup></a>.

ISO/IEC 27001: Requires periodic control of information access to meet
the security objectives of the Information Security Management System
(ISMS)<a href="#fn5" id="fnref5" class="footnote-ref"><sup>5</sup></a>.

GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation): Organizations must restrict
access to personal information and enforce measures to safeguard such
data<a href="#fn6" id="fnref6" class="footnote-ref"><sup>6</sup></a>.

**Enhancing Audit Readiness** – Organizations need to demonstrate strong
access controls during audits. A well-documented access certification
process provides auditors with clear evidence of compliance, reducing
the likelihood of penalties.

**Addressing Organizational Changes** – Mergers, acquisitions, internal
reorganizations, and employee role transitions often lead to shifts in
access requirements. Certification helps realign access with current
business needs.

**Protecting Sensitive Data** – By ensuring that only authorized
personnel have access to critical systems and data, access certification
minimizes the risk of data leaks, financial fraud, or unauthorized
transactions.

Types of Access Certifications
==============================

Access certification processes can vary depending on the type of
reviewers and the privileges being assessed. The most common types
include:

**Manager Certification:** In this process, a manager reviews their team
members' access to determine whether they should retain or revoke it.
This method aligns with most compliance requirements and ensures
employees adhere to the principle of least privilege in their daily
tasks. Since managers have direct knowledge of their team members'
responsibilities, they are well-positioned to evaluate whether access
remains necessary.

**Privilege Owner Certification:** Conducted by a privilege owner (such
as an entitlement or role owner), this type of review is primarily used
for sensitive privileges. In some systems, entitlements or roles can be
complex, making it crucial for a privilege owner, the one who oversees
the structure and integrity of these permissions, to determine if a user
should continue having access to a specific privilege.

**System Owner Certification:** This process is useful when a system or
application owner has a comprehensive understanding of who requires
access. System owner reviews are particularly beneficial in environments
where they have insight into both the system’s privileges and the
necessity of user accounts. This approach is also ideal for systems with
a limited number of predefined roles or those that lack structured roles
altogether.

**Event-Driven Access Certification:** Significant organizational
changes, such as mergers, acquisitions, team restructuring, or employee
role changes, necessitate a reassessment of user access. Event-driven
certifications help ensure users retain only the access required for
their new roles while removing unnecessary permissions. An advanced
access governance system can automate the generation of these events,
prompting timely reviews. A new manager is typically responsible for
evaluating and adjusting user access after such transitions.

Lifecycle of Access Certification
=================================

<img src="optimizing-access-review-image1.png" width="700" height="600" alt="initiation, review and decision, remediation, audit and reporting, optimization" />

*Figure* *1: Lifecycle of Access Recertification*

Irrespective of the type of access certification, their lifecycle can be
represented as a cyclical process involving several key stages. These
stages are described below: 

**Initiation** – The certification process begins with identifying
users, roles, and entitlements needing review. This step defines the
scope, frequency, and compliance requirements.

**Review & Decision** – Access reviewers (such as managers, system
owners, or compliance officers) assess whether users should retain,
modify, or revoke access based on business needs and policies.

**Remediation** – If excessive or outdated access is identified,
corrective actions (such as access removal or privilege adjustments) are
taken to enforce the principle of least privilege.

**Audit & Reporting** – The review results are documented for audit
purposes. Compliance teams may generate reports to demonstrate adherence
to regulatory and security requirements. This reporting step is an
essential aspect of the access certification process and the one that
matters the most from an audit and compliance perspective. The auditors
often like to check if the corrective actions were taken on time and
whether proper records are in place.

**Optimization** – Organizations analyze certification data to identify
recurring issues, improve access governance policies, and optimize
future certification cycles

The process is repeated periodically (e.g., quarterly, semi-annually,
annually) to ensure ongoing security and compliance.

Frequency of Access Recertification
===================================

Recertifications can be done periodically (quarterly, semi-annually, or
annually), as a one-time activity, or event-driven, depending on various
factors:

**Compliance Requirements**: **SOX, PCI, HIPAA,** and others require
specific recertification frequencies, usually semi-annual or annual, to
meet audit and compliance obligations. Align your recertification cycles
with these mandates to avoid penalties and maintain a strong security
posture.

**Risk Associated With Access**: A risk-based approach is a good way to
manage recertifications at scale. High-risk or privileged access (e.g.,
admin accounts, financial systems) should be reviewed more often,
usually quarterly. Moderate-risk access can be reviewed semi-annually,
and low-risk entitlements annually to optimize without compromising
security.

**Event-Driven Triggers**: Beyond periodic reviews, access should be
re-certified when role changes, terminations, mergers, or security
incidents occur. These triggers ensure entitlements are current and
don’t introduce risk from outdated or excessive access.

Challenges in the Access Certification Process and How to Overcome Them
=======================================================================

As mentioned before, access certification is a crucial process, but it
comes with several challenges that organizations must address to make it
efficient and effective.

**1. Review Fatigue and Rubber-Stamping  
Challenge:  
**Reviewers, including managers, privilege owners, and system owners,
often encounter a high volume of access review requests, leading to
fatigue and a tendency to approve access without proper validation, a
practice known as "rubber-stamping."

**Solution:**

**Risk-Based Prioritization:** Rather than reviewing all access
indiscriminately, organizations should focus on high-risk permissions.
This approach involves scoping reviews based on data sensitivity, user
roles, and access levels, ensuring that critical permissions receive the
necessary scrutiny.

**Automated Recommendations:** Leveraging AI and machine learning
algorithms can aid in identifying outlier access patterns and
recommending decisions based on access trends, sensitivity levels, and
other relevant factors. This approach enhances decision-making
efficiency and accuracy.

**2. Lack of Context for Reviewers  
Challenge:  
**Reviewers often lack sufficient insights into users' access needs,
making it difficult to assess whether access remains necessary.
Decision-making can be ineffective without contextual information, such
as access request history, usage frequency, or peer comparisons.

**Solution:**

**Contextual Data Presentation:** Providing key details, such as when
access was requested, its intended purpose, recent usage patterns, and
whether similar access exists among peers, can significantly improve
review accuracy. Displaying associated risk levels further aids
reviewers in making informed decisions.

**Integration with HR and IT Systems:** Connecting access governance
solutions with HR systems enables automatic detection of user lifecycle
events (e.g., role changes), triggering appropriate access reviews and
ensuring timely modifications.

**Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) or Policy-Based Access Control
(PBAC):** Implementing structured access models, such as RBAC,
simplifies decision-making by associating technical entitlements with
user-friendly role names (e.g., "IT Admin"). RBAC allows for enrollments
via the assignment of roles (hopefully with HR integrations) and
leverages group memberships. Policy-Based Access Control (PBACK) is also
a popular access control model. In the PBAC scenario, access control is
managed by dynamically evaluating attributes such as user department,
location, or risk level against predefined policies to determine access.
Having a structured approach reduces complexity for reviewers unfamiliar
with granular access details.

**3. Audit and Compliance Complexities**

**Challenge:  
**Maintaining detailed audit logs and proving compliance with regulatory
requirements can be challenging, especially for large enterprises with
multiple systems.

**Solution:**

**Centralized Identity Governance and Administration (IGA) Platforms:**
Use a mature IGA solution to maintain audit trails and generate
compliance reports.

**Automated Logging and Reporting:** Implement tools that capture all
access review actions in real-time.

**Regular Compliance Reviews:** Schedule periodic internal audits to
ensure certifications align with regulatory standards.

**4. Scalability Issues in Large Organizations**

**Challenge:  
**Enterprises with thousands of employees and diverse applications
struggle to scale the access certification process efficiently. 

Automation of processes can help significantly, but the extent of
automation in the access certification process depends on the maturity
of an enterprise's access governance and provisioning solutions. In
highly automated environments where access provisioning is
policy-driven, user access reviews may become unnecessary, as only the
policies themselves need to be evaluated for appropriateness.
Conversely, the certification process becomes significantly more manual
in less mature setups where access is manually provisioned and target
systems are not integrated with the access governance solution. In such
cases, organizations may rely on spreadsheets and documents to track
access, coordinate with reviewers, and work with system owners to revoke
inappropriate access.

**Solution:**

**Automation and AI-Powered Access Reviews:** Reduce manual effort by
using AI/ML to analyze access patterns and suggest approvals or
revocations.

**Implement Rule-Based Provisioning**: Implementing automated rules for
low-risk access eliminates the need for manual reviews. For instance,
predefined access rules for repositories in a version control system can
significantly reduce the review burden for managers.

**Dynamic Access Reviews:** Implement event-driven certifications
triggered by job changes, project completions, or system updates.

**Federated Review Approach:** Break reviews into smaller segments by
delegating them to multiple stakeholders.

**5. Lack of Integration Across Multiple Systems  
Challenge:  
**Organizations often manage access across various applications, cloud
services, and legacy systems that may lack interoperability,
complicating the certification process.

**Solution:**

**API-Based Integration:** Utilizing API-driven connectors allows
seamless aggregation of access data from disparate systems into a
unified governance framework.

**Unified Identity Governance Platforms:** Adopting modern identity
governance solutions that integrate with both on-premises and cloud
applications enhances visibility and control over access reviews.

**6. Inconsistent or Unclear Policies  
Challenge:  
**Organizations with poorly defined access certification policies face
inconsistencies in enforcement, resulting in security vulnerabilities.

**Solution:**

**Standardized Access Policies:** Establishing clear guidelines for
different access levels and defining uniform review criteria ensures
consistency in certification efforts.

**Policy-Based Access Management:** Automating policy enforcement
minimizes discrepancies and strengthens access governance.

**Regular Training and Awareness Programs:** Educating reviewers on
their responsibilities and the importance of precise access validation
enhances the overall effectiveness of the certification process.

Conclusion
==========

Access certification enforces access governance and compliance and helps
validate security best practices. For an organization to keep the
identity management framework compliant and secure, an effective access
certification is necessary. Even though the process is crucial in
enforcing security best practices, it suffers from various issues such
as rubber-stamping, blind spots, and scalability issues. Having said
this, organizations need to be more effective when it comes to the
review process. Automating tools, AI-based decision-making, and
contextual data diagrams are some of the manually challenging aspects
that organizations should adopt. In addition, certification approaches
must be aligned with the policies of the organization and industry,
improving overall governance. If access certification is configured
correctly and optimized, security risks will be minimized and a
proactive security culture will be encouraged, ensuring users gain
access only to what is required.

 

Author Bio
==========

Vatsal Gupta is an experienced professional with over 12 years of
expertise in Identity and Access Management (IAM) and cybersecurity. As
a trusted advisor to Fortune 100 clients, he specializes in implementing
IAM solutions that reduce risks and enhance security through automation,
scalability, and compliance management. Vatsal has a strong academic
background, holding a master’s in management information systems (MS in
MIS) from Texas A&M University, and has a deep understanding of the
technical and business aspects of IAM. His work focuses on leveraging AI
and machine learning to optimize IAM processes, ensuring organizations
maintain robust security measures while adhering to industry standards
and regulations.

<div class="section footnotes">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  <div id="fn1">

    Cameron, A. & Grewe, O., (2022) “An Overview of the Digital Identity
    Lifecycle (v2)”, *IDPro Body of Knowledge* 1(7). doi: [<span
    class="underline">https://doi.org/10.55621/idpro.31</span>](https://doi.org/10.55621/idpro.31)<a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back">↩︎</a>

    </div>

2.  <div id="fn2">

    U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), (n.d.).
    *Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Compliance*. Retrieved from [<span
    class="underline">https://www.sec.gov/</span>](https://www.sec.gov/)<a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back">↩︎</a>

    </div>

3.  <div id="fn3">

    Hazlett, C. J., Roth, J. S., Bagchi, D., & Shrivastava, R. K.
    (2018). Principles of the Least Privilege in Cybersecurity. In D.
    Bagchi & R. K. Shrivastava (Eds.), Cybersecurity: The Beginner’s
    Guide. StatPearls Publishing. Retrieved from [<span
    class="underline">https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK500019/</span>](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK500019/)<a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back">↩︎</a>

    </div>

4.  <div id="fn4">

    Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council (PCI SSC), (2022).
    *PCI DSS v4.0: Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard Version
    4.0*. Retrieved from [<span
    class="underline">https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/</span>](https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/)<a href="#fnref4" class="footnote-back">↩︎</a>

    </div>

5.  <div id="fn5">

    International Organization for Standardization (ISO), (2013).
    *ISO/IEC 27001: Information security management systems –
    Requirements*. Retrieved from [<span
    class="underline">https://www.iso.org/standard/27001</span>](https://www.iso.org/standard/27001)<a href="#fnref5" class="footnote-back">↩︎</a>

    </div>

6.  <div id="fn6">

    Hindle, A., (2020) “Impact of GDPR on Identity and Access
    Management”, *IDPro Body of Knowledge* 1(1). doi: [<span
    class="underline">https://doi.org/10.55621/idpro.24</span>](https://doi.org/10.55621/idpro.24)<a href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back">↩︎</a>

    </div>

</div>
