---
title: Independent IAM Organizations
---

Editor's Note
=============

*This is a sample of some of the independent IAM organizations that
exist in the world. While we have tried to include as many organizations
as possible, IAM is a vibrant, global space and we almost certainly have
missed some.  Please contact us editor@idpro.org if you are aware of
other independent IAM organization that we should consider adding to
future issues of the IDPro Body of Knowledge.*

The Better Identity Coalition ([www.betteridentity.org](https://www.betteridentity.org/))
=========================================================================================

The Better Identity Coalition is an organization focused on developing
and advancing consensus-driven, cross-sector policy solutions that
promote the development and adoption of better solutions for identity
verification and authentication.

Launched in February 2018, the Better Identity Coalition has brought
together leading firms to create and advance a set of consensus policy
recommendations to address the inadequacies of legacy identity
solutions--- with a focus on solutions that empower consumers to protect
and assert their identity online. The Coalition has quickly emerged as
the organization policymakers call when they want ideas on how to
improve digital identity.

Our publication, ["Better Identity in America: A Blueprint for
Policymakers"](https://www.betteridentity.org/s/Better_Identity_Coalition-Blueprint-July-2018.pdf)
outlined a comprehensive action plan for government to improve the state
of digital identity. Launched at an event on Capitol Hill, the Blueprint
has garnered praise from members of Congress in both parties, as well as
executives in the White House and agencies such as the Treasury
Department and Social Security Administration.

At the core of the Coalition's recommendations is the belief that the
private sector will not be able to solve America's identity challenges
on its own. While the private sector continues to innovate in identity,
we are at a juncture where the government will need to step up and play
a bigger role to help address critical vulnerabilities in our "digital
identity fabric." While the original focus of the Coalition was on the
United States, the Blueprint has garnered positive attention from other
countries and the Coalition is now engaged on a limited basis beyond
U.S. borders.

Founding members of the Better Identity Coalition are recognized leaders
from different sectors of the economy, encompassing firms in financial
services, health care, technology, fintech, payments, and security. The
Coalition is an initiative of the Center for Cybersecurity Policy & Law,
a non-profit dedicated to promoting education and collaboration with
policymakers on policies related to cybersecurity.

For more information on the Coalition, please visit
<https://www.betteridentity.org/> or email <info@betteridentity.org>.

DIACC ([www.diacc.ca](https://www.diacc.ca))
====================

The DIACC is a non-profit coalition of private and public sector leaders
working to unlock interoperable capabilities of the public and private
sector to secure Canada's full and beneficial participation in the
digital economy by fulfilling the following strategic goals.

-   Create, publish, and evolve the Pan-Canadian Trust Framework and
    identify the legislative needs to support the vision.

-   Accelerate interoperability by securing adoption of the Pan-Canadian
    Trust Framework by businesses and governments.

-   Design, develop, launch a certification program aligned with market
    needs.

-   Raise profile of Canada's digital identity innovation via the DIACC
    as Canada's digital identity forum.

-   Create Canadian expertise and intellectual property for excellence
    in digital identity.

-   Enable Canada's full, secure, and beneficial global digital economy
    participation.

-   Advance Canada's digital economy agenda which depends on digital
    identity that is ubiquitous, trustworthy, convenient, and private.

-   Equip consumers and businesses with tools for services online, on
    the phone, and in person.

-   Unlock digital ID service capabilities of the public and private
    sectors.

DIACC members collaborate in our committees to accelerate the delivery
of an interoperable ecosystem of digital identity services that
Canadians can use with confidence.

The Trust Framework Expert Committee (TFEC) will deliver Canada's
Digital Trust Framework, including the Pan-Canadian Trust Framework™
(PCTF) developed as an open public resource which will always be freely
available to the public for review and adoption and is developed under
DIACC's transparent and neutral good governance policies and procedures.

The Innovation Expert Committee (IEC) engages members to identify
business priorities and requirements for adoption of identity solutions
and services and ultimately for the adoption of Canada's Digital Trust
Framework schemes.

The Outreach Expert Committee (OEC) engages members to develop messages
and impactful narratives to communicate opportunities and challenges
regarding digital identity.

For more information about DIACC please contact us at:

info@diacc.ca

Connecting Canadians through digital identity innovation

[DIACC.ca](http://diacc.ca/) \| [@mydiacc](http://twitter.com/mydiacc)

Identity Defined Security Alliance ([www.idsalliance.org](https://www.idsalliance.org))
========================================================

In the last several years, Identity and Access Management (IAM) has
transitioned from operational and user experience driven to recognition
as core to security. However, despite the increase in credential related
breaches and the shifting focus to identities and actions as the
mechanism for insight into security events, the majority of
organizations are not leading with this premise today. A lack of IAM
maturity, an over-abundance of complex security technologies, and
confusion over where to start are just a few reasons that organizations
miss this inherently valuable identity:security connection.

The Identity Defined Security Alliance (IDSA) was created to help
organizations address this challenge. The IDSA is a group of identity
and security vendors, solution providers and practitioners that acts as
an independent source of thought leadership, expertise, and practical
guidance on identity centric approaches to security for technology
professionals. The IDSA is a nonprofit that facilitates community
collaboration to help organizations reduce risk by providing education,
best practices and resources, achieving its mission through:

-   Cross vendor collaboration

-   Thought leadership blogs, webinars, speaking

-   Identity Centric Security Framework - vendor-agnostic best
    practices, use cases, security control methods

-   Customer implementation stories

-   Virtual community for sharing experiences and validation

Visit [www.idsalliance.org](https://idsalliance.org) to learn more, access resources and join the
IDSA community.

IDPro ([www.idpro.org](https://idpro.org))
=====================

Where can an Identity and Access Management (IAM) practitioner turn for
advice? How can organizations grow new IAM practitioners? How can the
IAM industry grow in executive mindshare, market size, and equality? The
answer is a professional organization for IAM.

IDPro is that organization.

IDPro is an industry organization formed to promote the IAM sector and
bring conformity to the vocabulary and practices used in the planning
and deployment of IAM solutions.

IDPro is a place for IAM professionals to learn how to make their
programs and projects more successful. A place for professionals to
learn how to grow their own careers. A place for professionals to learn
how to work with their peers from Security, Privacy, and lines of
business. An independent voice that extols the value of IAM as a partner
of, and equal to, both Security and Privacy as well as a crucial
business partner for customer experience.

IDPro offers the IAM community a powerful, collective voice, that in
turn:

-   helps define, support, and improve the IAM profession globally

-   facilitates IAM practitioners interacting with, learning from, and
    giving back to their professional community

-   enables IAM technology and service providers to interact with IAM
    professionals in thoughtful, respectful, and valuable ways

-   IDPro develops and maintains the IAM Body of Knowledge that
    describes the components within IAM and provides direction to
    professionals working in the sector.

Kantara Initiative ([www.kantarainitiative.org](https://www.kantarainitiative.org))
==============================================

([www.kantarainitiative.org](https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=http-3A__www.kantarainitiative.org&d=DwMFaQ&c=w_KKIrnflabZu7RVO9QOig&r=sUURud0DEGZlrJY1d720YbU5NxCCGtBCPJEmfgWd8PM&m=iN96bBAI54gcziUig3J1QS9dDNtJg0ZRVisoqeKeigQ&s=QEVD3KU-hayTnbiIZ3kOXanou7O1IbzflPbeeDsHzTw&e=),
[edufoundation.kantarainitiative.org](https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=http-3A__edufoundation.kantarainitiative.org&d=DwMFaQ&c=w_KKIrnflabZu7RVO9QOig&r=sUURud0DEGZlrJY1d720YbU5NxCCGtBCPJEmfgWd8PM&m=iN96bBAI54gcziUig3J1QS9dDNtJg0ZRVisoqeKeigQ&s=G-fAgldNadHv7f38J1Ch5LlPN15tZAgISGwXwgBR8Rg&e=),
and
[kantarainitiative.eu](https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=http-3A__kantarainitiative.eu&d=DwMFaQ&c=w_KKIrnflabZu7RVO9QOig&r=sUURud0DEGZlrJY1d720YbU5NxCCGtBCPJEmfgWd8PM&m=iN96bBAI54gcziUig3J1QS9dDNtJg0ZRVisoqeKeigQ&s=SYvz9moEBZYfJytaeOOtQHeAZ5ClN8u_5PqAhsYPTRQ&e=))

The multi-national community of Kantara Initiative organizations are of
unique interest to ID Pro, not only because it was Kantara that opened
the online pledge that led to incubating ID Pro into creation in 2017
but also because the way in which Kantara's broad scope of activities
complements those of ID Pro. Launched in 2009, Kantara is globally
acknowledged for its ethics and ethos of low/no barriers to
participation - one of only two organizations to operate this business
model and the first ever to incubate another organization in the digital
identity ecosystem.

A significant number of organization and individual ID Pro members are
also members of Kantara. The rationale varies depending on the context,
such is the uniquely broad scope of Kantara's activities, but they
typically revolve around Kantara's mission of improving the trustworthy
use of identity and personal data through innovation, standardization
and good practice. Kantara is the only industry organization to
explicitly scope-in privacy and personal data agency alongside digital
identity, given the twinned nature of the concepts. The reasons they
typically join Kantara include:

-   receiving Trust Marks as an approved identity credential service
    provider against NIST 800-63-3 and other classes of approval -
    Kantara being the only organization to provide 3rd party assessment
    and assurance of this standard

-   benefitting from ongoing development of internationally recognized
    specifications such as Consent Receipt (now in ISO) and the
    standardized OAuth extensions for multi-party permission sharing and
    delegation found in UMA - User Managed Access - (now in IETF)

-   leveraging Kantara's channel to international policy and standards
    settings bodies such as ISO, IETF, OECD and UNCITRAL typically off
    limits to most organizations

-   reaching potential markets beyond the home nation through Kantara's
    international community network and speaking opportunities

-   contributing new good practice, standardization and Trust Marked
    assurance ideas to Kantara's community working groups for
    collaborative development - 'of but not by' the contributing
    organization or individual

-   creating potential opportunities in grant funded R&D and education
    through Kantara's US based Educational Foundation and Kantara
    Europe's EU H2020 R&D program.

Visit the Kantara websites for more information on the range of
activities on offer and membership benefits.

WOMEN IN IDENTITY ([www.womeninidentity.org](https://www.womeninidentity.org))
===========================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

The lack of diversity across the identity sector is leading to a
situation where vital products, products with real socio-economic
impact, are being developed with unconscious bias baked into them. And
it's not because anybody wakes up in the morning and says 'I'm going to
make a product that doesn't work particularly well for one set of human
beings.' But the reality is -- if you have homogenous teams, you're
going to miss things.

Having a 'women in' group is a great support network for the 5% or so of
people who work in our sector. But really, as an industry, we need to
think about how we design, develop and test products that will work for
ALL people. Our vision and mission is that digital identity solutions
intended FOR everyone need to be built BY everyone. We are championing
greater diversity across teams because We honestly believe that this is
the only way to ensure we build the best products as an industry.

Women In Identity was officially launched as a not-for-profit in June
2019, and membership is approaching 1000 members across N America,
Europe, Africa and Australasia. In December 2019, the organisation was
named one of the [10 most influential
organizations](https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=https-3A__www.biometricupdate.com_201912_top-2D10-2Ddigital-2Didentity-2Dinfluencing-2Dorganizations-2Dnamed-2Dby-2Dgoode-2Dintelligence&d=DwMFaQ&c=w_KKIrnflabZu7RVO9QOig&r=sUURud0DEGZlrJY1d720YbU5NxCCGtBCPJEmfgWd8PM&m=pkK4m6dkmKfHBhhBc79iGn6bxFoyQ5QKTJ1wodnmpEk&s=2c94OJxsyPiiv98mLgAlFbKs9uVs2A-4DgKCFtnTWXk&e=)
in the digital identity community by Goode Intelligence. Its four
strategic pillars include:

-   events and networking,

-   career development through a jobs board,

-   internships and mentoring to help prepare women for more senior
    roles in the industry, and

-   research into diversity and issues around inclusion.

Membership is free of charge to all in order to ensure support is as
accessible as possible. As more and more women come forward to challenge
and lead the diversity debate, we hope to provide a platform which will
support the industry in making the best use of existing talent. As well
as ensuring sustainable success by attracting new, diverse talent that
reflects the ultimate users of our products.

Want to know more? Visit
[www.womeninidentity.org](http://www.womeninidentity.org) and follow us
on Twitter (@WomeninID) and LinkedIn (@Womeninidentity).
